.\" Manpage for pcbasic
.TH man 1 "17 August 2014" "1.1" "pcbasic man page"
.SH NAME
PC-BASIC 3.23: a BASIC intepreter compatible with GW-BASIC 3.23
.SH SYNOPSIS
pcbasic           [--preset [{cga,strict,pcbasic,tandy,pcjr} [{cga,strict,pcbasic,tandy,pcjr} ...]]]
                  [--input input_file] [--output output_file] [-b] [-t] [-g]
                  [-l] [-r] [-e command_line] [-q] [-d] [-f NUMBER]
                  [-s NUMBER] [-c NUMBER]
                  [--peek [SEG:ADDR:VAL [SEG:ADDR:VAL ...]]] [--lpt1 TYPE:VAL]
                  [--lpt2 TYPE:VAL] [--lpt3 TYPE:VAL] [--com1 TYPE:VAL]
                  [--com2 TYPE:VAL] [--conv [mode:outfile]]
                  [--codepage NUMBER] [--font-family TYPEFACE]
                  [--font [TYPEFACE [TYPEFACE ...]]] [--nosound]
                  [--dimensions X, Y] [--dimensions-text X, Y] [--fullscreen]
                  [--smooth] [--noquit] [--debug] [--strict-hidden-lines]
                  [--strict-protect] [--caps] [--mount [D:PATH [D:PATH ...]]]
                  [--resume] [--strict-newline] [--pcjr-syntax {pcjr,tandy}]
                  [--pcjr-term PCJR_TERM]
                  [--video {ega,cga,cga_old,pcjr,tandy}]
                  [--windows-map-drives] [--cga-low] [--composite] [-h]
                  [basic_program]
.SH DESCRIPTION
PC-BASIC 3.23 is a BASIC interpreter compatible with Microsoft GW-BASIC, Tandy 1000 BASIC
and IBM PCjr Cartridge BASIC. 
.SH EXAMPLES
pcbasic                             
    Runs a graphical interactive session.
.PP
pcbasic PROGRAM.BAS                 
    Runs PROGAM.BAS in a graphical session.
.PP
pcbasic --mount C:/home/me
    Runs a graphical session with the "C:" drive ampped to /home/me  
.PP
pcbasic --preset=tandy              
    Runs an interactive session in Tandy 1000 mode.                    
.PP
pcbasic PCJRPROG.BAS --preset=pcjr -q 
    Runs PCJRPROG.BAS in PCjr mode and quit PC-BASIC when the program ends.                    
.PP
pcbasic -b                          
    Runs a command-line interactive session.
.PP
pcbasic -bqe "print 1+1"            
    Executes the command directly on the command line - returns 2 and exits.
.PP
pcbasic PROGRAM.BAS --conv a        
    Writes listing of PROGRAM.BAS to standard output in MS-DOS ASCII format.
.PP
pcbasic -l PROGRAM.BAS -bqe "LIST"  
    Writes listing of PROGRAM.BAS to standard output as UTF-8 text.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
  basic_program         Input program file to run (default), load or convert.
  --preset [{cga,strict,pcbasic,tandy,pcjr} [{cga,strict,pcbasic,tandy,pcjr} ...]]
                        Load machine preset options
  --input input_file    Retrieve keyboard input from input_file, except if
                        KYBD: is read explicitly.
  --output output_file  Send screen output to output_file, except if SCRN: is
                        written to explicitly.
  -b, --dumb            Use dumb text terminal. This is the default if
                        redirecting input.
  -t, --ansi            Use ANSI textmode terminal
  -g, --graphical       Use graphical terminal. This is the normal default;
                        use to override when redirecting i/o.
  -l, --load            Load in_file only, do not execute
  -r, --run             Execute input file (default if in_file given)
  -e command_line, --exec command_line
                        Execute BASIC command line
  -q, --quit            Quit interpreter when execution stops
  -d, --double          Allow double-precision math functions
  -f NUMBER, --max-files NUMBER
                        Set maximum number of open files (default is 3).
  -s NUMBER, --max-reclen NUMBER
                        Set maximum record length for RANDOM files (default is
                        128, max is 32767).
  -c NUMBER, --serial-in-size NUMBER
                        Set serial input buffer size (default is 256). If 0,
                        serial communications are disabled.
  --peek [SEG:ADDR:VAL [SEG:ADDR:VAL ...]]
                        Define PEEK preset values
  --lpt1 TYPE:VAL       Set LPT1: to FILE:file_name or PRINTER:printer_name.
  --lpt2 TYPE:VAL       Set LPT2: to FILE:file_name or PRINTER:printer_name.
  --lpt3 TYPE:VAL       Set LPT3: to FILE:file_name or PRINTER:printer_name.
  --com1 TYPE:VAL       Set COM1: to PORT:device_name or SOCKET:host:socket.
  --com2 TYPE:VAL       Set COM2: to PORT:device_name or SOCKET:host:socket.
  --conv [mode:outfile]
                        Convert basic_program to (A)SCII, (B)ytecode or
                        (P)rotected mode. Implies --unprotect and --list-all.
  --codepage NUMBER     Load specified font codepage; default is 437
  --font-family TYPEFACE
                        Load current codepage from specified font family.
  --font [TYPEFACE [TYPEFACE ...]]
                        Load specified fonts. These are used for the
                        appropriate resolutions, regardless of font-family and
                        codepage seetings.
  --nosound             Disable sound output
  --dimensions X, Y     Set pixel dimensions for graphics mode. Default is
                        640,480. Use 640,400 or multiples for cleaner pixels -
                        but incorrect aspect ratio - on square-pixel LCDs.
                        Graphical terminal only.
  --dimensions-text X, Y
                        Set pixel dimensions for text mode. Default is
                        640,400. Graphical terminal only.
  --fullscreen          Fullscreen mode. This is unlikely to have either the
                        correct aspect ratio or clean square pixels, but it
                        does take up the whole screen. Graphical terminal
                        only.
  --smooth              Use smooth display scaling. Graphical terminal only.
  --noquit              Allow BASIC to capture <ALT+F4>. Graphical terminal
                        only.
  --debug               Enable DEBUG keyword
  --strict-hidden-lines
                        Disable listing and ASCII saving of lines beyond 65530
                        (as in GW-BASIC). Use with care as this allows
                        execution of unseen statements.
  --strict-protect      Disable listing and ASCII saving of protected files
                        (as in GW-BASIC). Use with care as this allows
                        execution of unseen statements.
  --caps                Start in CAPS LOCK mode.
  --mount [D:PATH [D:PATH ...]]
                        Set a drive letter to PATH.
  --resume              Resume from saved state. Most other arguments are
                        ignored.
  --strict-newline      Parse CR and LF strictly like GW-BASIC. May create
                        problems with UNIX line endings.
  --pcjr-syntax {pcjr,tandy}
                        Enable PCjr/Tandy 1000 syntax extensions
  --pcjr-term PCJR_TERM
                        Set the program run by the PCjr TERM command
  --video {ega,cga,cga_old,pcjr,tandy}
                        Set video capabilities
  --windows-map-drives  Map all Windows drive letters to PC-BASIC drive
                        letters (Windows only)
  --cga-low             Use low-intensity palettes in CGA (for
                        --video={cga,ega} only).
  --composite           Start in composite colorburst mode. Disables smooth
                        scaling.
  -h, --help            Show this message and exit
.SH FILES
.I ./info/PCBASIC.INI
Configuration file. The configuration options correspond to the command-line option: if a command-line option is given as --option VALUE,
the corresponding entry in PCBASIC.INI is option=VALUE. Presets (such as cga and tandy) are defined in this file as groups of options under a header in square brackets. 
.SH BUGS
This is beta software; many bugs are still expected to pop up. Please inform the author through the sourceforge project page at http://sourceforge.net/projects/pcbasic/
.SH AUTHOR
Rob Hagemans
